Effective ACR discovery (#244)
solid/authorization-panel: proposals/evaluation/uc-0-effective-acr.md

This is part 0 of the [implementation specific use cases comparison](./use-cases.md).

The "effective access control resource" (ACR) of a resource R, is the resource that contains the rules that will be used by the server to determine access to R.

## 1. Discovering a resource's effective access control

A Solid client that wants to decide which credentials to present to access a resource or determine if it can edit the ACR, needs to discover the effective ACR of the resource in question.

### Setup

We have the following hierarchy of resources:

```turtle  
</default.acr>
</foo/bar/baz/x>
</foo/bar/baz/x.acr>
```

### Universal effective ACR discovery

Both WAC and ACP follow an `acl` link header in the response to a resource `R` in order find the Access Control Rules. 
(The name "acl" for the type of such a link [is being discussed](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/228).) 

We can start both our examples with the client making a `GET` request on `/foo/bar/baz/x` which returns either of the following responses:

  A. The response is successful but the client wants to then edit the access control rules
```HTTP
200 Ok
Link: </foo/bar/baz/x.acr>; rel="acl"

> Link: <.>; rev="http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#contains"

Reviewer: the [WAC spec says](https://solid.github.io/web-access-control-spec/#effective-acl-resource)

> WAC has the property of being recursive with respect to container hierarchy, meaning that a member resource inherits Authorizations from the closest container resource (heading towards the root container).

For ldp the way to find the container is by following the reverse of `ldp:contains`. 
As I understand you don't specify how to find the container. So I don't see any other way for ldp of finding the parent.

> Link: <.>; rev="http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#contains"

Reviewer 2: You're right in that it is unspecified, and that can be a reasonable way for LDP clients to find the container of a resource.

# Effective Access Control Resource Discovery Use Cases

This is part 0 of the [implementation specific use cases comparison](./use-cases.md).

The "effective access control resource" (ACR) of a resource R, is the resource that contains the rules that will be used by the server to determine access to R.

## 1. Discovering a resource's effective access control

A Solid client that wants to decide which credentials to present to access a resource or determine if it can edit the ACR, needs to discover the effective ACR of the resource in question.

### Setup

We have the following hierarchy of resources:

```turtle  
</default.acr>
</foo/bar/baz/x>
</foo/bar/baz/x.acr>
```

### Universal effective ACR discovery

> Both WAC and ACP follow an `acl` link header in the response to a resource `R` in order find the Access Control Rules. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Both WAC and ACP follow an `acl` link header in the response to a resource `R`, in order to find the Access Control Rules. 
```

(The name "acl" for the type of such a link [is being discussed](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/228).) 

We can start both our examples with the client making a `GET` request on `/foo/bar/baz/x` which returns either of the following responses:

>   A. The response is successful but the client wants to then edit the access control rules

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  A. The response is successful, but the client then wants to edit the access control rules:
```

```HTTP
200 Ok
Link: </foo/bar/baz/x.acr>; rel="acl"
Link: <.>; rev="http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#contains"
Content-Length: 2042
Content-Type: ...

...
```

>   B. The response is unsuccessful and the client wants to find out how to authenticate to gain access:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  B. The response is unsuccessful, and the client wants to find out how to authenticate to gain access:
```

```HTTP
401 Unauthorized
Link: </foo/bar/baz/x.acr>; rel="acl"
Link: <.>; rev="http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#contains"
```

The second `Link`, with relation type `ldp:contains`, is needed for WAC.

### ACP

> In ACP, every resource has exactly 1 effective access control resource directly associated with it, and every access control resource directly governs access over itself and exactly one other resource.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In ACP, every resource has exactly one effective access control resource directly associated with it, and every access control resource directly governs access over itself and exactly one other resource.
```

In ACP, access control statements can be spread over several resources; that is, an access control resource can reference other resources.

In ACP, the access control system in place (that is, ACP, as opposed to WAC, for example) is indicated via a `Link` header of `rel="type"` `<http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/acp#AccessControlResource>` in HTTP response to a request for an ACR.

> On receiving the `404` with the `Link` header given in our example, the client can make a request on `/foo/bar/baz/x.acr` if it wants to look at the Access Control Rules. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On receiving the `404` with the `Link` header given in our example, the client can make a request on `/foo/bar/baz/x.acr`, if it wants to look at the Access Control Rules. 
```

As in ACP all resources have an associated ACR, the resource <`/foo/bar/baz/x.acr>` should return a description of the sets of agents that can have access to the resource. 
This may include links to rules published elsewhere.

### WAC

In WAC, the effective ACR of a resource might be the ACR of a parent container of the resource.

In WAC, ACRs are called ACLs (Access Control Lists).

WAC's [Effective ACL Resource](https://solid.github.io/web-access-control-spec/#effective-acl-resource) discovery is described in [the WAC spec](https://solid.github.io/web-access-control-spec/) as follows:

> ##### Effective ACL Resource Algorithm
> To determine the effective ACL resource of a resource, perform the following steps. Returns string (the URI of an ACL Resource).
>
> 1. Let resource be the resource.
> 2. Let aclResource be the ACL resource of resource.
> 3. If resource has an associated aclResource with a representation, return aclResource.
> 4. Otherwise, repeat the steps using the container resource of resource.

Just as with ACP, the client can follow the `Link: <...acr>; rel="acl"` relation to find out the rules of access. 

> But then we have to cases with WAC:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But then we have two cases with WAC:
```

1. the ACR exists and returns the rules 
2. the ACR returns a `404 Not Found`

> In (1) everything follows like with ACP above.
> In (2) the client then needs to start the recursive process of looking for the effective ACR. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In (1), everything follows like with ACP above.
In (2), the client then needs to start the recursive process of looking for the effective ACR. 
```

We will detail (2) next.

1. First the client is lucky enough to be shown the reverse `ldp:contains` relation, so it can do a HEAD on that to find its `ACL`.
```HTTP
HEAD /foo/bar/baz/ HTTP/1.1
```

> and with luck the server will respond

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— and with luck the server will respond —
```

```HTTP
200 Ok
Link: </foo/bar/baz/.acr>; rel="acl"
Link: </foo/bar/>; rev="http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#contains"
```

> The client can then continue with

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The client can then continue with —
```

```HTTP
GET /foo/bar/baz/.acr HTTP/1.1
```

> to which the server will also return

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— to which the server will also return —
```

Reviewer 3: missed applying this one...

```HTTP
404 Not Found
```

> as the resource does not yet exist.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— as the resource does not yet exist.
```

> 2. As a result the client will need to look up one level in the hierarchy to search for the effective ACR

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. As a result, the client will need to look up one level in the hierarchy to search for the effective ACR:
```

```HTTP
HEAD /foo/bar/ HTTP/1.1
```

> and with luck the server will respond

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— and with luck the server will respond —
```

```HTTP
200 Ok
Link: </foo/bar/.acr>; rel="acl"
Link: </foo/>; rev="http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#contains"
```

> The client can then continue with

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The client can then continue with —
```

```HTTP
GET /foo/bar/baz/.acr HTTP/1.1
```

> to which the server will also return

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— to which the server will also return —
```

```HTTP
404 Not Found
```

> as the resource does not yet exist.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— as the resource does not yet exist.
```

> 3. As a result the client will need to look up one level in the hierarchy to search for the effective ACR

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. As a result, the client will need to look up one level in the hierarchy to search for the effective ACR
```

```HTTP
HEAD /foo/ HTTP/1.1
```

> and with luck the server will respond

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— and with luck the server will respond —
```

```HTTP
200 Ok
Link: </foo/.acr>; rel="acl"
Link: </>; rev="http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#contains"
```

> The client can then continue with

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The client can then continue with —
```

```HTTP
GET /foo/.acr HTTP/1.1
```

> to which the server will also return

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— to which the server will also return —
```

```HTTP
404 Not Found
```

> as the resource does not yet exist.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— as the resource does not yet exist.
```

> 4. As a result the client will need to look up one level in the hierarchy to search for the effective ACR

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. As a result, the client will need to look up one level in the hierarchy to search for the effective ACR:
```

```HTTP
HEAD / HTTP/1.1
```

> and with luck the server will respond

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— and with luck the server will respond —
```

```HTTP
200 Ok
Link: </.acr>; rel="acl"
```
The client can then continue with
```HTTP
GET /foo/.acr HTTP/1.1
```

> to which the server will finally return the content.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— to which the server will finally return the content.
```

                  
### WAC+NTrig

> A resource can let a client know that it supports dataset serialisation its ACR by returning the following header in either the 200 or 401:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A resource can let a client know that it supports dataset serialisation of its ACR by returning the following header with either a 200 or 401 HTTP result code:
```

This is part 0 of the [implementation specific use cases comparison](./use-cases.md).

The resource governing access over another resource is called its effective access control resource (ACR).

## 1. Discovering a resource's effective access control

A Solid client needs to discover effective ACR in order to understand and or edit access permissions.

Both WAC and ACP use the same effective ACR discovery mechanism.

### Setup

We have the following hierarchy of resources:

```
</x>
</x.acr>
```

### Universal effective ACR discovery

An agent making a GET or HEAD HTTP request on `</x>` will receive a `Link: </x.acr>; rel="acl"` header in the response that points to the above `</x.acr>`.

The Link header with relationship type `acl` indicates the access control resource of a resource.

### ACP

In ACP, every resource has exactly 1 effective access control resource directly associated with it, and every access control resource directly governs access over itself and exactly one other resource.

In ACP, access control statements can be spread over several resources; that is, an access control resource can reference other resources.

> In ACP, the access control system in place (that is, ACP, as opposed to WAC, for example) is indicated via a Link header of `rel="type"` `<http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/acp#AccessControlResource>`.

Reviewer 4: Is that link present in response to ACR?

Author: Yes.

> In ACP, the access control system in place (that is, ACP, as opposed to WAC, for example) is indicated via a Link header of `rel="type"` `<http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/acp#AccessControlResource>`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In ACP, the access control system in place (that is, ACP, as opposed to WAC, for example) is indicated via a Link header of `rel="type"` `<http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/acp#AccessControlResource>` in HTTP response when requesting ACR.
```

### WAC

> In WAC, the effective ACR of a resource might be the ACR of a parent container of the resource.

Reviewer: From the client's point of view the only thing that matters should be the `Link: <....acl>; rel="acl">` relation in the header.
The text about the effective ACL process (see my comment below) is aimed at the server I think. 
But that means that the `Link: <...acl>, rel="acl"> link when pointing to the default only allows the client to edit the default header, as the client cannot just create ACL resources by guessing them.

So that means that: a server that allows the client to also edit acls for a resource must have 2 `Link:` headers: one for the default and that could be created with a PUT, in order to override the default. I think @csarven agreed with that in the last meeting.

Reviewer 2: I don't recall saying that. I probably said that extensions can be introduced to those things - as mentioned in the current WAC ED.

Reviewer: Ah I thought we had come to the conclusion that having two acl links could solve the problem. But it is not in the meeting notes. 

Does the spec explicitly state that one cannot have two link headers? 

Anway, so if I understand you correctly, the right way to do things is for the acl link header to point to the non-existent acl for that resource, and if the client gets a [404 Page not found](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_404) then it should follow the links down the hierarchy container by container to find the default.

Reviewer: I added a full description of what needs to be done in WAC with a default three levels deep in this commit. https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/pull/244/commits/893dc36ff73f74e6b2eb87a03fba1910710a37c7

Author: Superb, thank you Henry.

In WAC, ACRs are called ACLs (Access Control Lists).

WAC's [Effective ACL Resource](https://solid.github.io/web-access-control-spec/#effective-acl-resource) discovery is described in [the WAC spec](https://solid.github.io/web-access-control-spec/) as follows:

> ### Effective ACL Resource Algorithm
> To determine the effective ACL resource of a resource, perform the following steps. Returns string (the URI of an ACL Resource).
>
> 1. Let resource be the resource.
> 2. Let aclResource be the ACL resource of resource.
> 3. If resource has an associated aclResource with a representation, return aclResource.
> 4. Otherwise, repeat the steps using the container resource of resource.

> 

Reviewer: I don't think the algorithm for determining the ACL of a resource in the spec is relevant to the client. 
In the previous wiki version of the spec on which the current spec is based it was stated quite clearly that one should not try to guess. 
So I think that text is only aimed at the server, to allow the server to determine which ACL to add to the header. Am I right @csarven ?
btw. I think that means the text "To determine the effective ACL..." should be: "For a server to determine..." the effective ACL of a resource...

Reviewer 2: No, it is aimed at any anything that wants to determine the ACL of a resource, including servers, clients..

Reviewer: The [previous version of the document](https://github.com/solid/web-access-control-spec/blob/main/README-v0.5.0.md) that was the official one just a little over a month ago, stated that 

> It is considered an anti-pattern for a client to perform those steps, however. A client may discover and load a document's individual resource (for example, for the purposes of editing its permissions). If such a resource does not exist, a client SHOULD NOT search for, or interact with, the inherited ACLs from an upstream container.

Also the algorithm given for finding the container is very vague, because you are trying to specify WAC without assuming LDP, which would make finding the container a lot simpler.

So should we instead write up an example where the client has to try to guess its way back up the hierarchy to find the default ACL? I guess we can make our lives a bit simpler to ourselves if we also have a 
`Link: <.>; rev="http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#contains">` on the resource, so that the client can find the default.

Which do you prefer?

Reviewer 2: The previous document did say that but we also had an issue on https://github.com/solid/specification/issues/106 to change that. WAC ED's #effective-acl-resource addressed that issue.

As for WAC without LDP's containment.. that makes the spec more flexible and combined with other specs. Servers implementing LDP/Solid can already work with it.

# Effective Access Control Resource Discovery Use Cases

This is part 0 of the [implementation specific use cases comparison](./use-cases.md).

> The resource mandating access over another resource is called its effective access control resource (ACR).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The resource governing access over another resource is called its effective access control resource (ACR).
```

## 1. Discovering a resource's effective access control

A Solid client needs to discover effective ACR in order to understand and or edit access permissions.

Both WAC and ACP use the same effective ACR discovery mechanism.

### Setup

We have the following hierarchy of resources:

```
</x>
</x.acr>
```

### Universal effective ACR discovery

An agent making a GET or HEAD HTTP request on `</x>` will receive a `Link: </x.acr>; rel="acl"` header in the response that points to the above `</x.acr>`.

The Link header with relationship type `acl` indicates the access control resource of a resource.

### ACP

> In ACP, every resource has exactly 1 effective access control resource directly associated to it and every access control resource directly mandates access over exactly one resource and itself.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In ACP, every resource has exactly 1 effective access control resource directly associated with it, and every access control resource directly governs access over itself and exactly one other resource.
```

> In ACP, access control statements can be spread over several resources, that is, an access control resource can reference other resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In ACP, access control statements can be spread over several resources; that is, an access control resource can reference other resources.
```

> In ACP, the access control system in place, that is, ACP (as opposed to for example WAC), is indicated via a Link header of `rel="type"` `<http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/acp#AccessControlResource>`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In ACP, the access control system in place (that is, ACP, as opposed to WAC, for example) is indicated via a Link header of `rel="type"` `<http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/acp#AccessControlResource>`.
```

### WAC

In WAC, the effective ACR of a resource might be the ACR of a parent container of the resource.

> In WAC ACRs are called ACLs (Access Control Lists).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In WAC, ACRs are called ACLs (Access Control Lists).
```

In ACP, access control statements can be spread over several resources; that is, an access control resource can reference other resources.

> In ACP, the access control system in place (that is, ACP, as opposed to WAC, for example) is indicated via a Link header of `rel="type"` `<http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/acp#AccessControlResource>` in HTTP response when requesting an ACR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In ACP, the access control system in place (that is, ACP, as opposed to WAC, for example) is indicated via a Link header of `rel="type"` `<http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/acp#AccessControlResource>` in HTTP response to a request for an ACR.
```

...
```
  B. The response is unsuccessful, and the client wants to find out how to authenticate to gain access:
```HTTP
401 Unauthorized
Link: </foo/bar/baz/x.acr>; rel="acl"
Link: <.>; rev="http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#contains"
```

> The second `Link`, with relation type `ldp:contains`, is helpful to help WAC clients determine the effective acl.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The second `Link`, with relation type `ldp:contains`, helps WAC clients determine the effective ACL.
```

```HTTP
HEAD /foo/bar/ HTTP/1.1
```
— and with luck the server will respond —
```HTTP
200 Ok
Link: </foo/bar/.acr>; rel="acl"
Link: </foo/>; rev="http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#contains"
```
The client can then continue with —
```HTTP
GET /foo/bar/baz/.acr HTTP/1.1
```
— to which the server will also return —
```HTTP
404 Not Found
```
— as the resource does not yet exist.

3. As a result, the client will need to look up one level in the hierarchy to search for the effective ACR:
```HTTP
HEAD /foo/ HTTP/1.1
```
— and with luck the server will respond —
```HTTP
200 Ok
Link: </foo/.acr>; rel="acl"
Link: </>; rev="http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#contains"
```
The client can then continue with —
```HTTP
GET /foo/.acr HTTP/1.1
```
— to which the server will also return —
```HTTP
404 Not Found
```
— as the resource does not yet exist.

4. As a result, the client will need to look up one level in the hierarchy to search for the effective ACR:
```HTTP
HEAD / HTTP/1.1
```
— and with luck the server will respond —

```HTTP
200 Ok
Link: </.acr>; rel="acl"
```
The client can then continue with —
```HTTP
GET /foo/.acr HTTP/1.1
```
— to which the server will finally return the content.

### WAC+

> The WAC effective resource discovery algorithm, needed when default ACLs exist, is as shown above, an expensive process for the client to follow, requiring a large number of failed requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The WAC effective resource discovery algorithm, needed when default ACLs exist, is, as shown above, an expensive process for the client to follow, requiring a large number of failed requests.
```

We have three ways to fix this:

>  * WAC+Trig, allows the server to return datasets and so return the result in one request
>  * WAC+:imports, shows how one can, as with ACP, have every resource come with its own ACR, but still have allow defaults to work.
>  * WAC+rel=control allows the server to publish two `Link` relations: one to the ACR and the other to the effective ACR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 * WAC+Trig — allows the server to return datasets, and so return the result in one request
 * WAC+:imports — shows how one can, as with ACP, have every resource come with its own ACR, but still allow defaults to work
 * WAC+rel=control — allows the server to publish two `Link` relations: one to the ACR, and the other to the effective ACR.
```

#### WAC+NTrig

> A resource can let a client know that it supports dataset serialisation of its ACR by returning the following header with either a 200 or 401 HTTP result code as proposed in [issue 247](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/247):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A resource can let a client know that it supports dataset serialisation of its ACR by returning the following header with either a `200` or `401` HTTP result code as proposed in [issue 247](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/247):
```

```
— to which the server will finally return the content.

> The number of requests needed to find the default can be calculated by the forumla:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The number of requests needed to find the default can be calculated by the formula:
```

```
reqN = 2 * slashes + extraFile
```

> where - 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— where —
```

> * `slashes` is the number of slashes between the original resource and the effective ACR,
> * `extraFile` is 0 if the resource is an ldp:Container and 1 if it is a plain resource.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `slashes` is the number of slashes between the original resource and the effective ACR
* `extraFile` is `0` if the resource is an `ldp:Container` and `1` if it is a plain resource
```

}
```

This should be read as 
 * specifying that no triples exist in`</foo/bar/baz/x.acr>` 
 * giving the triples in the `</.default.acr>` graph

With a slight adjustment to the WAC spec, this could still count as there being nothing other than the default, which would therefore still be active as default for the given resource.

#### WAC+:imports

Another way to allow default reasoning is to use `:imports` as proposed in [issue 210: add :imports relation](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/210). 

> [Reactive Solid](https://github.com/co-operating-systems/Reactive-SoLiD) has every resource come with an ACR with content. But the server has ACRs for newly created resources explictly `:import` the parent, so that `</foo/bar/baz/x.acr>` returns

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Reactive Solid](https://github.com/co-operating-systems/Reactive-SoLiD) has every resource come with an ACR with content. But the server has ACRs for newly created resources explictly `:import` the parent, so that `</foo/bar/baz/x.acr>` returns —
```

```Turtle
<> :imports <.acr> .
```

> and `</foo/bar/baz/.acr>` returns 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
— and `</foo/bar/baz/.acr>` returns —
```

```
<> :imports <../.acr> .
```

And so on, up to the root `</.acr>`.

> Clients with control access to a resource, can change the ACR to point straight to the root one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Clients with control access to a resource can change the ACR to point straight to the root ACR.
```

#### WAC + TriG + :imports

Both of those answers can be combined of course.
This was proposed in the May 11th comment to [issue 210: add :imports relation](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/210#issuecomment-838747077).
                                      
#### WAC + acl=control

> This is perhaps the simplest solution. By specifying another link relation type, to non created ACR resource we can help the client find its way very quickly to the effective resource, without loosing the ability to edit the most specific one. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is perhaps the simplest solution. By specifying another link relation type to non-created ACR resource, we can help the client find its way very quickly to the effective resource, without losing the ability to edit the most specific one. 
```
